What does it mean to be a woman who writes poetry after the vanguardist confrontation with femininity? By the early 2000s, several distinct strains of writing fell under the descriptor “women’s poetry.” Chelsey Minnis and Lara Glenum, third-wave feminists who wrote kitschy, ironic “gurlesque” poems, repurposed the avant-garde’s love for the inauthentic. Theoretically speaking, they dismantled Poetry Barbie and chopped off her hair. But a much larger group of women was busy writing poems whose values tracked more closely to those of the creative writing workshop. This “post-confessional” poetry, still much influenced by second-wave feminism, is marked by its emphasis on lyric, earnestness, and personal experience. Contemporary poets as varied as Carmen Giménez Smith, Rachel Zucker, and Khadijah Queen can be included in this latter category. In the last decade, these aesthetic modes cross-pollinated into an uneasy hybrid that now dominates literary publishing.

All of Bianca Stone’s collections, including her latest, What Is Otherwise Infinite (Tin House, 2022), employ this fused style. Her tone is primarily serious although punctuated by absurdist humor: “I am tired of algorithms / I was promised oblivion!” she declares in “The Body.” Elsewhere she writes, “it’s totally normal / the way you can waste your life / trying to fix your life.” Like her two previous collections, this book explores matrilineal heritage, intergenerational trauma, and feminist experience. Her new subject is becoming a mother; her daughter, Odette, was born in 2016. Invoking Sharon Olds, many of the poems frame these concerns through a psychological lens, as some of her titles indicate: “Psychodynamic Motivational Speech,” “Tragic Nature,” “The Ostensible Psychic Wound,” and, as if one wound isn’t enough, “Other Wound.”

The legacy of feminist poetry, its divisions and reconciliations, is particularly personal for Stone given that she is the granddaughter of Ruth Stone, whose wry, plainspoken poems garnered critical attention late in life. In 1959, Ruth’s husband, the poet Walter Stone, committed suicide, a tragedy that haunted her subsequent work. Suddenly a single mother, Ruth faced the difficult task of fending for herself and providing for her three young daughters. Within this family of women and girls, Ruth was the matriarch: her family worshiped her, resented her, and fought over her.

Ruth died in 2011, at age 96, and was buried on the grounds of her farmhouse in Goshen, Vermont. Bianca Stone, along with other family members, handled the intricate logistics of the home burial, right down to washing the body. “Making Applesauce with My Dead Grandmother,” from Stone’s second collection, The Möbius Strip Club of Grief (2018), addresses her grandmother’s influence on her life and work. (The book’s title, a humorous riff on her grandmother’s poem “The Möbius Strip of Grief,” suggests Stone’s need to concretize the poetic connection between them.) To understand the poem, it helps to know that there are apple trees planted on the property’s grounds. Stone writes, “If I dig her up and put her down in the wicker chair / I’d better be ready for the rest of the family // to make a fuss about it. I’d better bring her back right.” It’s hard not to imagine Ruth’s physical body and spirit conjured in the applesauce. Like a cooking recipe, the recipe for lyric is passed down from one generation of women to the next.

Ruth wanted her farmhouse in Goshen to become a haven for poets after she died. Bequeathed the estate, Stone took up the task shortly after Ruth’s death and transformed it from a home in disrepair into the Ruth Stone House, which today offers creative writing workshops and holds literary events. In addition, she edited The Essential Ruth Stone (2020), a collection of her grandmother’s poems. Stone’s devotion to her grandmother is apparent on and off the page.

But where there’s inheritance, there’s anxiety. “Interior Design,” a poem from The Möbius Strip Club of Grief, exposes the challenging dynamics among the women in the family. She writes, “nothing was ever ‘nice’ in my family. / They bear an intensity that allows / only for extremes: // It’s always been either ‘You’re a Genius!’ / Or ‘You’re a Hitler.’” These psychological pressures, the intimacies and burdens of close matrilineal ties, comprise the internal weather of Stone’s work. In “Quantum Mechanics Reveals the Unique Behaviors of Subatomic Particles that Make Up All Matter,” from What Is Otherwise Infinite, an image of engulfment makes clear what she is up against in forging her own poetic voice. “I’ve disappeared into the huge false teeth of my grandma’s mouth,” she writes. But quickly, the need for independence turns to guilt, the prime emotion of a good poetry daughter. She hopes Ruth will “posthumously forgive” her for their fight when Ruth shouted so hard that her dentures fell out.

Stone’s poetic landscape, like her grandmother’s, is marked by the absence of men, a condition exemplified by “Walter, Upon Looking Around,” a poem from Ruth’s collection In the Dark (2004):